1. What is the difference between preemption priority and sub-priority on Cortex-M3, and how does priority grouping split the 4 priority bits between them?
Preemption Priority determines whether one interrupt can interrupt (preempt) another interrupt that is currently executing.
Lower numerical value = Higher priority.
Example: Priority 0 can interrupt Priority 1.
Sub-Priority is used when two pending interrupts have the same preemption priority.
It decides which interrupt executes first after the CPU is free.
It does not allow one interrupt to interrupt another.
Priority Grouping

On STM32 Cortex-M3, 4 priority bits are available. These bits are divided between preemption priority and sub-priority using priority grouping.

Example:


For example, Group 2 allocates:

2 bits for preemption priority (4 levels)
2 bits for sub-priority (4 levels)

2. What register does HAL_NVIC_EnableIRQ() actually write to?

HAL_NVIC_EnableIRQ() ultimately enables an interrupt by writing to the NVIC Interrupt Set-Enable Register (ISER).

Internally, it calls:

NVIC_EnableIRQ(IRQn);

which writes to:

NVIC->ISER[n]

where ISER stands for Interrupt Set-Enable Register.

Writing a '1' to the corresponding bit enables that interrupt.

3. If two interrupts are pending at the exact same priority, what decides which one runs first?

If two interrupts have:

the same preemption priority, and
the same sub-priority,

then the NVIC chooses the interrupt with the lower IRQ number (interrupt number).

Thus, the execution order is:

Higher preemption priority
Lower sub-priority
Lower IRQ number (hardware tie-breaker)

4. What is the difference between an interrupt being "pending" versus "active" in NVIC terms?
Pending
An interrupt request has occurred.
The interrupt is waiting to be serviced.
It has not started executing yet.
Active
The processor has accepted the interrupt.
The Interrupt Service Routine (ISR) is currently executing.
The interrupt remains active until the ISR finishes.

Example:

A timer overflows → the timer interrupt becomes pending.
When the CPU begins executing the timer ISR, the interrupt becomes active.
After the ISR returns, the interrupt is no longer active.